The Project Gutenberg eBook of Japanese Literature
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Japanese Literature

Editor: Epiphanius Wilson


        
Release date: September 13, 2006 [eBook #19264]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19264

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


CURATION NOTE
=============
This file is a CURATED SUBSET of the original Project Gutenberg eBook,
Only the classical Japanese verse sections (Ballads, Love Songs,
Miscellaneous Poems, Short Stanzas) have been retained; the editor's
prose introduction, the entire Genji Monogatari novel, the Noh drama
selections, and the verse-section introductory essay have been removed
so that the corpus-trained sentence model captures the classical
Japanese verse form rather than ambient prose.

For the COMPLETE ORIGINAL eBook, see:
  https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19264


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAPANESE LITERATURE ***




    'Tis spring, and the mists come stealing
    O'er Suminóye's shore,
    And I stand by the seaside musing
    On the days that are no more.

    I muse on the old-world story,
    As the boats glide to and fro,
    Of the fisher-boy, Urashima,
    Who a-fishing loved to go;

    How he came not back to the village
    Though sev'n suns had risen and set,
    But rowed on past the bounds of ocean,
    And the sea-god's daughter met;

    How they pledged their faith to each other,
    And came to the Evergreen Land,
    And entered the sea-god's palace
    So lovingly hand in hand,

    To dwell for aye in that country,
    The ocean-maiden and he--
    The country where youth and beauty
              Abide eternally.

    But the foolish boy said, "To-morrow
    I'll come back with thee to dwell;
    But I have a word to my father,
    A word to my mother to tell."

    The maiden answered, "A casket
    I give into thine hand;
    And if that thou hopest truly
    To come back to the Evergreen Land,

    "Then open it not, I charge thee,
    Open it not, I beseech!"
    So the boy rowed home o'er the billows
    To Suminóye's beach.

    But where is his native hamlet,
    Strange hamlets line the strand,
    Where is his mother's cottage,
    Strange cots rise on either hand.

    "What, in three short years since I left it,"
    He cries in his wonder sore,
    "Has the home of my childhood vanished,
    Is the bamboo fence no more?

    "Perchance if I open the casket
    Which the maiden gave to me,
    My home and the dear old village
    Will come back as they used to be."

    And he lifts the lid, and there rises
    A fleecy, silvery cloud,
    That floats off to the Evergreen Country:--
    And the fisher-boy cries aloud;

    He waves the sleeve of his tunic,
    He rolls over on the ground,
    He dances with fury and horror,
    Running wildly round and round.

    But a sudden chill comes o'er him
    That bleaches his raven hair,
    And furrows with hoary wrinkles
    The form erst so young and fair.

    His breath grows fainter and fainter,
    Till at last he sinks dead on the shore;
    And I gaze on the spot where his cottage
    Once stood, but now stands no more.







    Methinks from the hedge round the garden
    His bride the fair hemp hath ta'en,
    And woven the fleecy raiment
    That ne'er he threw off him again.

    For toilsome the journey he journeyed
    To serve his liege and lord,
    Till the single belt that encircled him
    Was changed to a thrice-wound cord;

    And now, methinks, he was faring
    Back home to the country-side,
    With thoughts all full of his father,
    Of his mother, and of his bride.

    But here 'mid the eastern mountains,
    Where the awful pass climbs their brow,
    He halts on his onward journey
    And builds him a dwelling low;

    And here he lies stark in his garments,
    Dishevelled his raven hair,
    And ne'er can he tell me his birthplace,
    Nor the name that he erst did bear.







    In Ashinóya village dwelt
    The Maiden of Unáhi,
    On whose beauty the next-door neighbors e'en
    Might cast no wandering eye;

    For they locked her up as a child of eight,
    When her hair hung loosely still;
    And now her tresses were gathered up,
    To float no more at will.

    And the men all yearned that her sweet face
    Might once more stand reveal'd,
    Who was hid from gaze, as in silken maze
    The chrysalis lies concealed.

    And they formed a hedge round the house,
    And, "I'll wed her!" they all did cry;
    And the Champion of Chinu he was there,
    And the Champion of Unáhi.

    With jealous love these champions twain
    The beauteous girl did woo,
    Each had his hand on the hilt of his sword,
    And a full-charged quiver, too,

    Was slung o'er the back of each champion fierce,
    And a bow of snow-white wood
    Did rest in the sinewy hand of each;
    And the twain defiant stood.

    Crying, "An 'twere for her dear sake,
    Nor fire nor flood I'd fear!"
    The maiden heard each daring word,
    But spoke in her mother's ear:--

    "Alas! that I, poor country girl,
    Should cause this jealous strife,
    As I may not wed the man I love
    What profits me my life?

    "In Hades' realm I will await
    The issue of the fray."
    These secret thoughts, with many a sigh,
    She whisper'd and pass'd away.

    To the Champion of Chinu in a dream
    Her face that night was shown;
    So he followed the maid to Hades' shade,
    And his rival was left alone;

    Left alone--too late! too late,
    He gapes at the vacant air,
    He shouts, and he yells, and gnashes his teeth,
    And dances in wild despair.

    "But no! I'll not yield!" he fiercely cries,
    "I'm as good a man as he!"
    And girding his poniard, he follows after,
    To search out his enemy.

    The kinsmen then, on either side,
    In solemn conclave met,
    As a token forever and evermore--
    Some monument for to set,

    That the story might pass from mouth to mouth,
    While heav'n and earth shall stand;
    So they laid the maiden in the midst,
    And the champions on either hand.

    And I, when I hear the mournful tale,
    I melt into bitter tears,
    As though these lovers I never saw
    Had been mine own compeers.







    I stand by the grave where they buried
    The Maiden of Unáhi,
    Whom of old the rival champions
    Did woo so jealously.

    The grave should hand down through ages
    Her story for evermore,
    That men yet unborn might love her,
    And think on the days of yore.

    And so beside the causeway
    They piled up the bowlders high;
    Nor e'er till the clouds that o'ershadow us
    Shall vanish from the sky,

    May the pilgrim along the causeway
    Forget to turn aside,
    And mourn o'er the grave of the Maiden;
    And the village folk, beside,

    Ne'er cease from their bitter weeping,
    But cluster around her tomb;
    And the ages repeat her story,
    And bewail the Maiden's doom.

    Till at last e'en I stand gazing
    On the grave where she now lies low,
    And muse with unspeakable sadness
    On the old days long ago.


[Note.--The existence of the Maiden of Unáhi is not doubted by any of
the native authorities, and, as usual, the tomb is there (or said to
be there, for the present writer's search for it on the occasion of a
somewhat hurried visit to that part of the country was vain) to attest
the truth of the tradition. Ashinóya is the name of the village, and
Unáhi of the district. The locality is in the province of Setsutsu,
between the present treaty ports of Kobe and Osaka.]






    Where in the far-off eastern land
    The cock first crows at dawn,
    The people still hand down a tale
    Of days long dead and gone.

    They tell of Katsushika's maid,
    Whose sash of country blue
    Bound but a frock of home-spun hemp,
    And kirtle coarse to view;

    Whose feet no shoe had e'er confined,
    Nor comb passed through her hair;
    Yet all the queens in damask robes
    Might nevermore compare.

    With this dear child, who smiling stood,
    A flow'ret of the spring--
    In beauty perfect and complete,
    Like to the moon's full ring.

    And, as the summer moths that fly
    Towards the flame so bright,
    Or as the boats that deck the port
    When fall the shades of night,

    So came the suitors; but she said:--
    "Why take me for your wife,
    Full well I know my humble lot,
    I know how short my life."

    So where the dashing billows beat
    On the loud-sounding shore,
    Hath Katsushika's tender maid
    Her home for evermore.

    Yes! 'tis a tale of days long past;
    But, listening to the lay,
    It seems as I had gazed upon
    Her face but yesterday.





THE BEGGAR'S COMPLAINT


    The heaven and earth they call so great,
    For me are mickle small;
    The sun and moon they call so bright,
    For me ne'er shine at all.

    Are all men sad, or only I,
    And what have I obtained--
    What good the gift of mortal life,
    That prize so rarely gained,

    If nought my chilly back protects
    But one thin grass-cloth coat,
    In tatters hanging like the weeds
    That on the billows float--

    If here in smoke-stained, darksome hut,
    Upon the bare cold ground,
    I make my wretched bed of straw,
    And hear the mournful sound--

    Hear how mine aged parents groan,
    And wife and children cry,
    Father and mother, children, wife,
    Huddling in misery--

    If in the rice-pan, nigh forgot,
    The spider hangs its nest,
    And from the hearth no smoke goes up
    Where all is so unblest?

    And now, to make our wail more deep,
    That saying is proved true
    Of "snipping what was short before":--
    Here comes to claim his due,

    The village provost, stick in hand
    He's shouting at the door;--
    And can such pain and grief be all
    Existence has in store?


    Shame and despair are mine from day to day;
    But, being no bird, I cannot fly away.





A SOLDIER'S REGRETS ON LEAVING HOME


    When _I left_ to keep guard on the frontier
    (For such was the monarch's decree),
    My mother, with skirt uplifted,
    Drew near and fondled me;

    And my father, the hot tears streaming
    His snow-white beard adown,
    Besought me to tarry, crying:--
    "Alas! when thou art gone,

    "When thou leavest our gate in the morning,
    No other sons have I,
    And mine eyes will long to behold thee
    As the weary years roll by;

    "So tarry but one day longer,
    And let me find some relief
    In speaking and hearing thee speak to me!"
    So wail'd the old man in his grief.

    And on either side came pressing
    My wife and my children dear,
    Fluttering like birds, and with garments
    Besprinkled with many a tear;

    And clasped my hands and would stay me,
    For 'twas so hard to part;
    But mine awe of the sovereign edict
    Constrained my loving heart.

    I went; yet each time the pathway
    O'er a pass through the mountains did wind,
    I'd turn me round--ah! so lovingly!--
    And ten thousand times gaze behind.

    But farther still, and still farther,
    Past many a land I did roam,
    And my thoughts were all thoughts of sadness,
    All loving, sad thoughts of home;--

    Till I came to the shores of Sumi,
    Where the sovereign gods I prayed,
    With off'rings so humbly offered--
    And this the prayer that I made:--

    "Being mortal, I know not how many
    The days of my life may be;
    And how the perilous pathway
    That leads o'er the plain of the sea,

    "Past unknown islands will bear me:--
    But grant that while I am gone
    No hurt may touch father or mother,
    Or the wife now left alone!"

    Yes, such was my prayer to the sea-gods;
    And now the unnumbered oars,
    And the ship and the seamen to bear me
    From breezy Naníha's shores,

    Are there at the mouth of the river:--
    Oh! tell the dear ones at home,
    That I'm off as the day is breaking
    To row o'er the ocean foam.









    The long spring day is o'er, and dark despond
    My heart invades, and lets the tears flow down,
    As all alone I stand, when from beyond
    The mount our heav'n-sent monarch's throne doth crown.

    There breathes the twilight wind and turns my sleeve,
    Ah, gentle breeze! to turn, home to return,
    Is all my prayer; I cannot cease to grieve
    On this long toilsome road; I burn, I burn!

    Yes! the poor heart I used to think so brave
    Is all afire, though none the flame may see,
    Like to the salt-kilns there by Tsunu's wave,
    Where toil the fisher-maidens wearily.







    'Twas said of old, and still the ages say,
    "The lover's path is full of doubt and woe."
    Of me they spake: I know not, nor can know,
    If she I sigh for will my love repay,
    My heart sinks on my breast; with bitter strife
    My heart is torn, and grief she cannot see,
    All unavailing is this agony
    To help the love that has become my life.







    Tsunu's shore, Ihámi's brine,
    To all other eyes but mine
    Seem, perchance, a lifeless mere,
    And sands that ne'er the sailor cheer.

    Ah, well-a-day! no ports we boast,
    And dead the sea that bathes our coast;
    But yet I trow the wingèd breeze
    Sweeping at morn across our seas,

    And the waves at eventide
    From the depths of ocean wide,
    Onward to Watadzu bear
    The deep-green seaweed, rich and fair;

    And like that seaweed gently swaying,
    Wingèd breeze and waves obeying,
    So thy heart hath swayed and bent
    And crowned my love with thy content.

    But, dear heart! I must away,
    As fades the dew when shines the day;
    Nor aught my backward looks avail,
    Myriad times cast down the vale,

    From each turn the winding road
    Takes upward; for thy dear abode
    Farther and still farther lies,
    And hills on hills between us rise.

    Ah! bend ye down, ye cruel peaks,
    That the gate my fancy seeks,
    Where sits my pensive love alone,
    To mine eyes again be shown!







    The year has come, the year has gone again,
    And still no tidings of mine absent love,
    Through the long days of spring all heaven above
    And earth beneath, re-echo with my pain.

    In dark cocoon my mother's silk-worms dwell;
    Like them, a captive, through the livelong day
    Alone I sit and sigh my soul away,
    For ne'er to any I my love may tell.

    Like to the pine-trees I must stand and pine,
    While downward slanting fall the shades of night,
    Till my long sleeve of purest snowy white,
    With showers of tears, is steeped in bitter brine.







    From Kaminábi's crest
    The clouds descending pour in sheeted rain,
    And, 'midst the gloom, the wind sighs o'er the plain:--
      Oh! he that sadly press'd,
    Leaving my loving side, alone to roam
    Magami's des'late moor, has he reached home?







    As the bold huntsman on some mountain path
    Waits for the stag he hopes may pass that way,
    So wait I for my love both night and day:--
    Then bark not at him, as thou fearest my wrath.







    Where in spring the sweetest flowers
    Fill Mount Kaminábi's bowers,
    Where in autumn dyed with red,
    Each ancient maple rears its head,
    And Aska's flood, with sedges lin'd,
    As a belt the mound doth bind:--
    There see my heart--a reed that sways,
    Nor aught but love's swift stream obeys,
    And now, if like the dew, dear maid,
    Life must fade, then let it fade:--
    My secret love is not in vain,
    For thou lov'st me back again.






WIFE.--

    Though other women's husbands ride
    Along the road in proud array,
    My husband, up the rough hill-side,
    On foot must wend his weary way.

    The grievous sight with bitter pain
    My bosom fills, and many a tear
    Steals down my cheek, and I would fain
    Do aught to help my husband dear.

    Come! take the mirror and the veil,
    My mother's parting gifts to me;
    In barter they must sure avail
    To buy an horse to carry thee!

HUSBAND.--

    And I should purchase me an horse,
    Must not my wife still sadly walk,
    No, no! though stony is our course,
    We'll trudge along and sweetly talk.







    He comes not! 'tis in vain I wait;
    The crane's wild cry strikes on mine ear,
    The tempest howls, the hour is late,
    Dark is the raven night and drear:--
        And, as I thus stand sighing,
        The snowflakes round me flying
    Light on my sleeve, and freeze it crisp and clear.

    Sure 'tis too late! he cannot come;
    Yet trust I still that we may meet,
    As sailors gayly rowing home
    Trust in their ship so safe and fleet,
        Though waking hours conceal him,
        Oh! may my dreams reveal him,
    Filling the long, long night with converse sweet!







    HE.--To Hatsúse's vale I'm come,
          To woo thee, darling, in thy home;
          But the rain rains down apace,
          And the snow veils ev'ry place,
          And now the pheasant 'gins to cry,
          And the cock crows to the sky:--
            Now flees the night, the night hath fled,
            Let me in to share thy bed!

    SHE.--To Hatsúse's vale thou'rt come,
          To woo me, darling, in my home:--
          But my mother sleeps hard by,
          And my father near doth lie;
          Should I but rise, I'll wake her ear;
          Should I go out, then he will hear:--
            The night hath fled! it may not be,
            For our love's a mystery!







    Oh! he my prince, that left my side
      O'er the twain Lover Hills to roam,
    Saying that in far Kíshiu's tide
      He'd hunt for pearls to bring them home.

    When will he come? With trembling hope
      I hie me on the busy street,
    To ask the evening horoscope,
      That straightway thus gives answer meet--

    The lover dear, my pretty girl,
      For whom thou waitest, comes not yet,
    Because he's seeking ev'ry pearl
      Where out at sea the billows fret.

    "He comes not yet, my pretty girl,
      Because among the riplets clear
    He's seeking, finding ev'ry pearl;
      'Tis that delays thy lover dear.

    "Two days at least must come and go,
      Sev'n days at most will bring him back;
    'Twas he himself that told me so:--
      Then cease, fair maid, to cry Alack!"







    Across the bridge, with scarlet lacquer glowing,
    That o'er the Katashiha's stream is laid,
    All trippingly a tender girl is going,
    In bodice blue and crimson skirt arrayed,
    None to escort her: would that I were knowing
    Whether alone she sleeps on virgin bed,
    Or if some spouse has won her by his wooing:--
    Tell me her house! I'll ask the pretty maid!







    If as my spirit yearns for thine
    Thine yearns for mine, why thus delay,
    And yet, what answer might be mine
      If, pausing on her way,
      Some gossip bade me tell
    Whence the deep sighs that from my bosom swell?

    And thy dear name my lips should pass,
    My blushes would our love declare;
    No, no! I'll say my longing was
      To see the moon appear
      O'er yonder darkling hill;
    Yet 'tis on thee mine eyes would gaze their fill.







    Yes! 'twas the hour when all my hopes
    Seemed idle as the dews that shake
    And tremble in their lotus-cups
    By deep Tsurúgi's lake--
    'Twas then the omen said:--
      "Fear not! he'll come his own dear love to wed."
    What though my mother bids me flee
    Thy fond embrace? No heed I take;
    As pure, as deep my love for thee
    As Kiyosúmi's lake,
    One thought fills all my heart:--
      When wilt thou come no more again to part?





A MAIDEN'S LAMENT


    Full oft he swore, with accents true and tender,
    "Though years roll by, my love shall ne'er wax old!"
    And so to him my heart I did surrender,
    Clear as a mirror of pure burnished gold;

    And from that day, unlike the seaweed bending
    To ev'ry wave raised by the summer gust,
    Firm stood my heart, on him alone depending,
    As the bold seaman in his ship doth trust.

    Is it some cruel god that hath bereft me,
    Or hath some mortal stol'n away his heart,
    No word, no letter since the day he left me,
    Nor more he cometh, ne'er again to part!

    In vain I weep, in helpless, hopeless sorrow,
    From earliest morn until the close of day;
    In vain, till radiant dawn brings back the morrow,
    I sigh the weary, weary nights away.

    No need to tell how young I am and slender--
    A little maid that in thy palm could lie:--
    Still for some message comforting and tender,
    I pace the room in sad expectancy.







    Forever on Mikáne's crest,
      That soars so far away,
    The rain it rains in ceaseless sheets,
      The snow it snows all day.

    And ceaseless as the rain and snow
      That fall from heaven above,
    So ceaselessly, since first we met,
      I love my darling love.







      Oft in the misty spring
    The vapors roll o'er Mount Mikash's crest,
    While, pausing not to rest,
    The birds each morn with plaintive note do sing,
      Like to the mists of spring
    My heart is rent; for, like the song of birds,
    Still all unanswered ring
    The tender accents of my passionate words,
      I call her ev'ry day
    Till daylight fades away;
    I call her ev'ry night
    Till dawn restores the light;--
    But my fond prayers are all too weak to bring
      My darling back to sight.







    From the loud wave-washed shore
      Wend I my way,
    Hast'ning o'er many a flow'r,
    At close of day--
      On past Kusaka's crest,
    Onward to thee,
    Sweet as the loveliest
      Flower of the lea!


[Note.--A note to the original says: "The name of the composer of the
above song was not given because he was of obscure rank," a reason
which will sound strange to European ears.]












    Alas! poor mortal maid! unfit to hold
    High converse with the glorious gods above,
    Each morn that breaks still finds me unconsoled,
    Each hour still hears me sighing for thy love.

    Wert thou a precious stone, I'd clasp thee tight
    Around mine arm; wert thou a silken dress
    I'd ne'er discard thee, either day or night:--
    Last night, sweet love! I dreamt I saw thy face.




ON THE DEATH OF THE POET'S MISTRESS


    How fondly did I yearn to gaze
      (For was there not the dear abode
    Of her whose love lit up my days?)
      On Karu's often-trodden road.

    But should I wander in and out,
      Morning and evening ceaselessly,
    Our loves were quickly noised about,
      For eyes enough there were to see.

    So, trusting that as tendrils part
      To meet again, so we might meet,
    As in deep rocky gorge my heart,
      Unseen, unknown, in secret beat.

    But like the sun at close of day,
      And as behind a cloud the moon,
    So passed my gentle love away,
      An autumn leaf ta'en all too soon.

    When came the fatal messenger,
      I knew not what to say or do:--
    But who might sit and simply hear,
      Rather, methought, of all my woe.

    Haply one thousandth part might find
      Relief if my due feet once more,
    Where she so often trod, should wind
      Through Karu's streets and past her door.

    But mute that noise, nor all the crowd
      Could show her like, or soothe my care;
    So, calling her dear name aloud,
      I waved my sleeve in blank despair.





ELEGY ON THE POET'S WIFE


    The gulls that twitter on the rush-grown shore
    When fall the shades of night,
    That o'er the waves in loving pairs do soar
    When shines the morning light--
    'Tis said e'en these poor birds delight
    To nestle each beneath his darling's wing
              That, gently fluttering,
    Through the dark hours wards off the hoar-frost's might.

    Like to the stream that finds
    The downward path it never may retrace,
    Like to the shapeless winds,
    Poor mortals pass away without a trace:--
    So she I love has left her place,
    And, in a corner of my widowed couch,
    Wrapped in the robe she wove me,
              I must crouch,
    Far from her fond embrace.








    When began the earth and heaven,
    By the banks of heaven's river
    All the mighty gods assembled,
    All the mighty gods in council,
    And, for that her sov'reign grandeur
    The great goddess of the day-star
    Rul'd th' ethereal realms of heaven,
    Downward through the many-piled
    Welkin did they waft her grandson,
    Bidding him, till earth and heaven,
    Waxing old, should fall together,
    O'er the middle land of reed-plains,
    O'er the land of waving rice-fields,
    Spread abroad his power imperial.


    But not his Kiyomi's palace:--
    'Tis his sov'reign's, hers the empire;
    And the sun's divine descendant,
    Ever soaring, passeth upward
    Through the heav'n's high rocky portals.


    Why, dear prince, oh! why desert us,
    Did not all beneath the heaven,
    All that dwell in earth's four quarters,
    Pant, with eye and heart uplifted,
    As for heav'n-sent rain in summer,
    For thy rule of flow'ry fragrance,
    For thy plenilune of empire,
    Now on lone Mayúmi's hillock,
    Firm on everlasting columns,
    Pilest thou a lofty palace,
    Whence no more, when day is breaking,
    Sound thine edicts, awe-compelling,
    Day to day is swiftly gathered,
    Moon to moon, till e'er thy faithful
    Servants from thy palace vanish.







    Ofttimes in far Corea didst thou hear
      Of our Cipango as a goodly land;
    And so, to parents and to brethren dear
      Bidding adieu, thou sailed'st to the strand
    Of these domains, that own th' imperial pow'r,
      Where glittering palaces unnumbered rise;
    Yet such might please thee not, nor many a bow'r
      Where village homesteads greet the pilgrim's eyes:--
    But in this spot, at Sahoyáma's base,
      Some secret influence bade thee find thy rest--
    Bade seek us out with loving eagerness,
      As seeks the weeping infant for the breast,
    And here with aliens thou didst choose to dwell,
      Year in, year out, in deepest sympathy;
    And here thou buildest thee an holy cell;
      And so the peaceful years went gliding by,
    But ah! what living thing mote yet avoid
      Death's dreary summons?--And thine hour did sound
    When all the friends on whom thine heart relied
      Slept on strange pillows on the mossy ground,
    So, while the moon lit up Kasuga's crest,
      O'er Sahogáha's flood thy corse they bore
    To fill a tomb upon yon mountain's breast,
      And dwell in darkness drear for evermore,
    No words, alas! nor efforts can avail:--
      Nought can I do, poor solitary child,
    Nought can I do but make my bitter wail,
      And pace the room with cries and gestures wild,
    Ceaselessly weeping, till my snowy sleeve
      Is wet with tears. Who knows? Perchance, again
    Wafted, they're borne upon the sighs I heave,
      On 'Arima's far distant heights to rain.





ON THE POET'S SON FURUBI


    Sev'n are the treasures mortals most do prize,
      But I regard them not:--
    One only jewel could delight mine eyes--
      The child that I begot.

    My darling boy, who with the morning sun
      Began his joyous day;
    Nor ever left me, but with child-like fun
      Would make me help him play;

    Who'd take my hand when eve its shadows spread,
      Saying, "I'm sleepy grown;
    'Twixt thee and mother I would lay my head:--
      Oh! leave me not alone!"

    Then with his pretty prattle in mine ears,
      I'd lie awake and scan
    The good and evil of the coming years,
      And see the child a man.

    And, as the seaman trusts his bark, I'd trust
      That nought could harm the boy:--
    Alas! I wist not that the whirling gust
      Would shipwreck all my joy!

    Then with despairing, helpless hands I grasp'd
      The sacred mirror's sphere;
    And round my shoulder I my garments clasp'd,
      And prayed with many a tear:--

    "'Tis yours, great gods, that dwell in heav'n on high,
      Great gods of earth! 'tis yours
    To heed, or heed not, a poor father's cry,
      Who worships and implores!"

    Alas! vain pray'rs, that more no more avail,
      He languished day by day,
    Till e'en his infant speech began to fail,
      And life soon ebbed away.

    Stagg'ring with grief I strike my sobbing breast,
      And wildly dance and groan:--
    Ah! such is life! the child that I caress'd
      Far from mine arms hath flown.






    So young, so young! he cannot know the way:--
      On Hades' porter I'll a bribe bestow,
    That on his shoulders the dear infant may
      Be safely carried to the realms below.














    Countless are the mountain-chains
    Tow'ring o'er Cipango's plains;
    But fairest is Mount Kago's peak,
    Whose heav'nward soaring heights I seek,
    And gaze on all my realms beneath--
    Gaze on the land where vapors wreath
    O'er many a cot; gaze on the sea,
    Where cry the sea-gulls merrily,
    Yes! 'tis a very pleasant land,
    Fill'd with joys on either hand,
    Sweeter than aught beneath the sky,
    Dear islands of the dragon-fly!




THE MIKADO'S BOW


    When the dawn is shining,
    He takes it up and fondles it with pride;
    When the day's declining,
    He lays it by his pillow's side,
        Hark to the twanging of the string,
    This is the Bow of our great Lord and King,
    Now to the morning chase they ride,
    Now to the chase again at eventide:
        Hark to the twanging of the string,
    This is the Bow of our great Lord and King!







    When winter turns to spring,
    Birds that were songless make their songs resound,
    Flow'rs that were flow'rless cover all the ground;
    Yet 'tis no perfect thing:--
    I cannot walk, so tangled is each hill;
    So thick the herbs I cannot pluck my fill,
        But in the autumn-tide
    I cull the scarlet leaves and love them dear,
    And let the green leaves stay, with many a tear,
        All on the fair hill-side:--
    No time so sweet as that. Away! Away,
    Autumn's the time I fain would keep alway.







    When winter turns to spring,
    The dews of morn in pearly radiance lie,
    The mists of eve rise circling to the sky,
    And Kaminábi's thickets ring
    With the sweet notes the nightingale doth sing.







      Ne'er a melon can I eat,
    But calls to mind my children dear;
      Ne'er a chestnut crisp and sweet,
    But makes the lov'd ones seem more near,
    Whence did they come, my life to cheer,
      Before mine eyes they seem to sweep,
      So that I may not even sleep,
    What use to me the gold and silver hoard,
      What use to me the gems most rich and rare,
      Brighter by far--aye! bright beyond compare--
    The joys my children to my heart afford!







    Pure is Hatsúse mountain-brook--
    So pure it mirrors all the clouds of heaven;
    Yet here no fishermen for shelter look
    When sailing home at even:--
    'Tis that there are no sandy reaches,
    Nor sheltering beaches,
    Where the frail craft might find some shelt'ring nook,
    Ah, well-a-day! we have no sandy reaches:--
            But heed that not;
            Nor shelving beaches:--
            But heed that not,
    Come a-jostling and a-hustling
    O'er our billows gayly bustling:--
    Come, all ye boats, and anchor in this spot!







    Japan is not a land where men need pray,
    For 'tis itself divine:--
    Yet do I lift my voice in prayer and say:--
    "May ev'ry joy be thine,
    And may I too, if thou those joys attain,
    Live on to see thee blest!"
    Such the fond prayer, that, like the restless main,
    Will rise within my breast.







    Mountains and ocean-waves
        Around me lie;
    Forever the mountain-chains
        Tower to the sky;
    Fixed is the ocean
        Immutably:--
    Man is a thing of nought,
        Born but to die!







    Oh! that that ancient bridge,
    Hanging 'twixt heaven and earth, were longer still,
    Oh! that yon tow'ring mountain-ridge
    So boldly tow'ring, tow'red more boldly still,
    Then from the moon on high
    I'd fetch some drops of the life-giving stream--
    A gift that might beseem
    Our Lord, the King, to make him live for aye!







    Nightingales built the nest
    Where, as a lonely guest,
    First thy young head did rest,
        Cuckoo, so dear,
    Strange to the father-bird,
    Strange to the mother-bird,
    Sounded the note they heard,
        Tender and clear,
    Fleeing thy native bow'rs,
    Bright with the silv'ry flow'rs,
    Oft in the summer hours
        Hither thou fliest;
    Light'st on some orange tall,
    Scatt'ring the blossoms all,
    And, while around they fall,
        Ceaselessly criest,
    Through, through the livelong day
    Soundeth thy roundelay,
    Never its accents may
        Pall on mine ear:--
    Come, take a bribe of me,
    Ne'er to far regions flee;
    Dwell on mine orange-tree,
        Cuckoo, so dear!







    When my lord, who fain would look on
    Great Tsukúba, double-crested,
    To the highlands of Hitachi
    Bent his steps, then I, his servant,
    Panting with the heats of summer,
    Down my brow the sweat-drops dripping,
    Breathlessly toil'd onward, upward,
    Tangled roots of timber clutching,
    "There, my lord! behold the prospect!"
    Cried I, when we scaled the summit,
    And the gracious goddess gave us
    Smiling welcome, while her consort
    Condescended to admit us
    Into these, his sacred precincts,
    O'er Tsukúba, double-crested,
    Where the clouds do have their dwelling,
    And the rain forever raineth,
    Shedding his divine refulgence,
    And revealing to our vision
    Ev'ry landmark that in darkness
    And in shapeless gloom was shrouded;--
    Till for joy our belts we loosen'd,
    Casting off constraint, and sported,
    Danker now than in the dulcet
    Spring-time grew the summer grasses;
    Yet to-day our bliss was boundless.







    When the great men of old pass'd by this way,
    Could e'en their pleasures vie with ours to-day?












    Spring, spring has come, while yet the landscape bears
      Its fleecy burden of unmelted snow,
      Now may the zephyr gently 'gin to blow,
    To melt the nightingale's sweet frozen tears.




    Amid the branches of the silv'ry bowers
      The nightingale doth sing: perchance he knows
      That spring hath come, and takes the later snows
    For the white petals of the plum's sweet flowers.




    Too lightly woven must the garments be--
      Garments of mist--that clothe the coming spring:--
      In wild disorder see them fluttering
    Soon as the zephyr breathes adown the lea.




    Heedless that now the mists of spring do rise,
      Why fly the wild geese northward?--Can it be
    Their native home is fairer to their eyes,
      Though no sweet flowers blossom on its lea?




    If earth but ceased to offer to my sight
      The beauteous cherry-trees when blossoming,
    Ah! then indeed, with peaceful, pure delight,
      My heart might revel in the joys of spring!




    Tell me, doth any know the dark recess
      Where dwell the winds that scatter the spring flow'rs,
      Hide it not from me! By the heav'nly pow'rs,
    I'll search them out to upbraid their wickedness!




    No man so callous but he heaves a sigh
      When o'er his head the withered cherry-flowers
      Come flutt'ring down.--Who knows? the spring's soft show'rs
    May be but tears shed by the sorrowing sky.




    Whom would your cries, with artful calumny,
      Accuse of scatt'ring the pale cherry-flow'rs,
      'Tis your own pinions flitting through these bow'rs
    That raise the gust which makes them fall and die!




    In blossoms the wistaria-tree to-day
      Breaks forth, that sweep the wavelets of my lake:--
      When will the mountain cuckoo come and make
    The garden vocal with his first sweet lay?




    Oh, lotus leaf! I dreamt that the wide earth
      Held nought more pure than thee--held nought more true:--
      Why, then, when on thee rolls a drop of dew,
    Pretend that 'tis a gem of priceless worth?




    Can I be dreaming? 'Twas but yesterday
      We planted out each tender shoot again;
      And now the autumn breeze sighs o'er the plain,
    Where fields of yellow rice confess its sway.




    A thousand thoughts of tender, vague regret,
      Crowd on my soul, what time I stand and gaze
    On the soft-shining autumn moon; and yet
      Not to me only speaks her silv'ry haze.




    What bark impelled by autumn's fresh'ning gale
      Comes speeding t'ward me?--'Tis the wild geese arriv'n
      Across the fathomless expanse of Heav'n,
    And lifting up their voices for a sail!





    The silv'ry dewdrops that in autumn light
      Upon the moors, must surely jewels be;
      For there they hang all over hill and lea,
    Strung on the threads the spiders weave so tight.





    The trees and herbage, as the year doth wane,
      For gold and russet leave their former hue--
    All but the wave-toss'd flow'rets of the main,
      That never yet chill autumn's empire knew.





    The dews are all of one pale silv'ry white:--
      Then tell me, if thou canst, oh! tell me why
      These silv'ry dews so marvellously dye
    The autumn leaves a myriad colors bright?





    The warp is hoar-frost and the woof is dew--
      Too frail, alas! the warp and woof to be:--
    For scarce the woods their damask robes endue,
      When, torn and soiled, they flutter o'er the lea.





    E'en when on earth the thund'ring gods held sway
      Was such a sight beheld?--Calm Tatsta's flood,
      Stain'd, as by Chinese art, with hues of blood,
    Rolls o'er Yamáto's peaceful fields away.





    When falls the snow, lo! ev'ry herb and tree,
      That in seclusion through the wintry hours
      Long time had been held fast, breaks forth in flow'rs
    That ne'er in spring were known upon the lea.





    When from the skies, that wintry gloom enshrouds,
      The blossoms fall and flutter round my head,
      Methinks the spring e'en now his light must shed
    O'er heavenly lands that lie beyond the clouds.





    A thousand years of happy life be thine,
      Live on, my lord, till what are pebbles now,
      By age united, to great rocks shall grow,
    Whose venerable sides the moss doth line!





    Of all the days and months that hurry by
      Nor leave a trace, how long the weary tale,
      And yet how few the springs when in the vale
    On the dear flow'rets I may feast mine eye!





    If ever mortal in the days of yore
      By Heav'n a thousand years of life was lent,
    I wot not; but if never seen before,
      Be thou the man to make the precedent.





    Mine oft-reiterated pray'rs in vain
      The parting guest would stay: Oh, cherry-flow'rs,
      Pour down your petals, that from out these bow'rs
    He ne'er may find the homeward path again!





    With roseate hues that pierce th' autumnal haze
      The spreading dawn lights up Akashi's shore;
      But the fair ship, alas! is seen no more:--
    An island veils it from my loving gaze.





    Miyako-bird! if not in vain men give
      Thy pleasing name, my question deign to hear:--
      And has she pass'd away, my darling dear,
    Or doth she still for Narihira live?


       *       *       *       *       *




    The barest ledge of rock, if but a seed
      Alight upon it, lets the pine-tree grow:--
    If, then, thy love for me be love indeed,
      We'll come together, dear; it must be so!





    There is on earth a thing more bootless still
      Than to write figures on a running stream:--
    And that thing is (believe me if you will)
      To dream of one who ne'er of you doth dream.


       *       *       *       *       *




    Since that first night when, bath'd in hopeless tears,
      I sank asleep, and he I love did seem
      To visit me, I welcome ev'ry dream,
    Sure that they come as heav'n-sent messengers.





    Methinks my tenderness the grass must be,
      Clothing some mountain desolate and lone;
    For though it daily grows luxuriantly,
      To ev'ry mortal eye 'tis still unknown.





    Upon the causeway through the land of dreams
      Surely the dews must plentifully light:--
      For when I've wandered up and down all night,
    My sleeve's so wet that nought will dry its streams.





    Fast fall the silv'ry dews, albeit not yet
      'Tis autumn weather; for each drop's a tear,
    Shed till the pillow of my hand is wet,
      As I wake from dreaming of my dear.





    I ask'd my soul where springs th' ill-omened seed
      That bears the herb of dull forgetfulness;
    And answer straightway came:--Th' accursed weed
      Grows in that heart which knows no tenderness.





    So frail our life, perchance to-morrow's sun
      May never rise for me. Ah! well-a-day,
      Till comes the twilight of the sad to-day,
    I'll mourn for thee, O thou beloved one!





    The perfume is the same, the same the hue
      As that which erst my senses did delight:--
    But he who planted the fair avenue
      Is here no more, alas! to please my sight!





    One thing, alas! more fleeting have I seen
      Than wither'd leaves driv'n by the autumn gust:--
      Yea, evanescent as the whirling dust
    Is man's brief passage o'er this mortal scene!




    Softly the dews upon my forehead light:--
      From off the oars, perchance, as feather'd spray,
      They drop, while some fair skiff bends on her way
    Across the Heav'nly Stream on starlit night.




    What though the waters of that antique rill
      That flows along the heath, no more are cold;
      Those who remember what it was of old
    Go forth to draw them in their buckets still.




    Old Age is not a friend I wish to meet;
      And if some day to see me he should come,
    I'd lock the door as he walk'd up the street,
      And cry, "Most honored sir! I'm not at home!"




    Yes, I am old; but yet with doleful stour
      I will not choose to rail 'gainst Fate's decree,
      An' I had not grown old, then ne'er for me
    Had dawned the day that brings this golden hour.




    The roaring torrent scatters far and near
      Its silv'ry drops:--Oh! let me pick them up,
      For when of grief I drain some day the cup,
    Each will do service as a bitter tear.





    Long years, methinks, of sorrow and of care
      Must have pass'd over the old fountain-head
      Of the cascade; for, like a silv'ry thread,
    It rolls adown, nor shows one jet-black hair.




    If e'en that grot where thou didst seek release
      From worldly strife in lonesome mountain glen
      Should find thee sometimes sorrowful, ah! then
    Where mayest thou farther flee to search for peace?




    So close thy friendly roof, so near the spring,
      That though not yet dull winter hath gone hence,
      The wind that bloweth o'er our parting fence
    From thee to me the first gay flow'rs doth bring.




    If to this frame of mine in spring's first hour,
      When o'er the moor the lightsome mists do curl,
    Might but be lent the shape of some fair flower,
      Haply thou 'dst deign to pluck me, cruel girl!




    "Love me, sweet girl! thy love is all I ask!"
      "Love thee?" she laughing cries; "I love thee not!"
      "Why, then I'll cease to love thee on the spot,
    Since loving thee is such a thankless task!"




    A youth once lov'd me, and his love I spurn'd,
      But see the vengeance of the pow'rs above
      On cold indiff'rence:--now 'tis I that love,
    And my fond love, alas! is not returned.




    Beneath love's heavy weight my falt'ring soul
      Plods, like the packman, o'er life's dusty road,
    Oh! that some friendly hand would find a pole
      To ease my shoulders of their grievous load!














       *       *       *       *       *





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAPANESE LITERATURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


